[BEATBOXING]
SPEAKER 1: Jake's
camera rolling.
SPEAKER 2: [INAUDIBLE]
Open it up.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
SURMA: All right.
So what I basically did
is I wrote a blog post--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right.
SURMA: --I thought
was interesting.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Did it?
Was it?
Good.
Excellent.
SURMA: Nobody else seemed
to agree with that.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Brilliant.
SURMA: So I'm going to shove
it down everyone's throat
by putting it into
two or three episodes.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Boom.
Good tactic.
Excellent.
What are we talking about?
SURMA: So.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
Oh, your article.
SURMA: Yes, we're talking--
once again I'm
talking about workers.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yay.
SURMA: I'm never going to stop.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Brilliant.
SURMA: I've been
doing some research
and figuring out the
rough edges with workers?
What actually is the performance
benefit and the performance
impact?
Where's the cost?
Where's the gain?
[INAUDIBLE] Because
basically, at the very least,
I want most apps to use
workers to manage their state.
Because state, most
of the time, is
completely decoupled from any
DOM or most main thread APIs.
It's just a state object.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah, we see
that with like the redux stores
kind of stuff.
There's very little in
there that is DOM specific.
SURMA: So why isn't
redux [INAUDIBLE] worker,
for example, right?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right.
SURMA: Would be one example.
So let's talk
about a fictional--
not to-do a list app, because
we don't have enough of those.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Brilliant, OK.
SURMA: But let's assume
we would put our state
in a class, todoState.
It has all the method
you would want.
Like you add a todo,
you toggle a todo.
You could can even
subscribe to changes,
so your callback gets
called whenever something
changes in the to-do list.
To JSON, basically,
it turns this class
into a small JSON object that
you can serialize or send
over the wire.
And then we have an
internal notify function
that notifies all subscribers--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So if you put
a callback into subscribe,
it's going to add it to the
subscribers array presumably.
SURMA: Right.
So I know what we're doing
here is just on the [INAUDIBLE]
I add a comlink because
it makes it easier.
So in this sense, we are
just exposing an instance
of todoState, which means we
can use it in other threads
without having to worry
about postMessage.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Makes sense.
All right.
SURMA: All right.
So that means on
the main thread,
it would look like this.
If we create a worker,
we wrap it in comlink.
And now what we have is
this instance of the class,
even though it actually
lives somewhere else.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
Comlink is magic.
Yay.
SURMA: So what we can do,
we can-- on todoState,
we can call subscribe,
pass in our callback.
So this callback, we'll call it
every time the state changes.
We could call
render, which could
be a React render or
[INAUDIBLE] HTML, or whatnot.
Doesn't really matter right now.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Really
inconsistent use
of semicolons in this slide.
SURMA: I know.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It's very--
SURMA: Actually.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: --very
much bothering me.
SURMA: Only, I'm missing one.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: One, two.
SURMA: Oh.
Fine.
I'm missing two.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Oh, once
they invented Prettier, like,
half my skills are ruined.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
SURMA: Legit.
Same.
I just didn't run it on
this for some reason.
I should have.
And yeah, if you have
like a new task button,
you can add a click
listener and call addTodo,
because that's the benefit
that comlink gives you.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yep.
OK.
Got you.
SURMA: So that's
just so everybody's
on the same page roughly how I
imagine people using a worker.
Like, let's you just write
a class, it has your state.
And you just call
the methods on it.
And suddenly, you
have your logic
of the main thread, which
has loads of benefits,
but I'm not going to go into.
I wrote blog posts about them.
We can link them
in the description.
More reads for me.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: All right, yes.
Cool.
SURMA: But I want
to take a closer
look at this notify function.
Because the fact that we
are calling a function that
is on the main thread while we
are in the worker is actually--
that's the core
magic of comlink.
And that is kind of
comparable to this.
You know there's more details
happening under the hood.
But really what
comlink is doing,
it just sends a
message via postMessage
to the other thread saying, you
know what, invoke this function
with these arguments and let me
know what the return value is.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: A lot
of comlink is just
knowing the thing
that called it,
where to send the reply
back to and hooking that up.
SURMA: Exactly.
That's most of the
core logic of comlink.
What most people worry
about, for some reason, is,
is this slow?
Or they actually have the
assumption that this is slow.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Well,
you're thread hopping.
There's the serialization,
the deserialization.
SURMA: Something
about serialization.
But nobody really, I
think, knows what they
mean specifically [INAUDIBLE].
So I thought I want to dig into
this, and I want to measure it,
and I want to see at what
point we are actually
entering a problem zone.
So I looked at the spec.
And I kept looking at the spec.
And I was like, this
is a bit overwhelming.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
It's the HTML spec.
I can tell by the colors.
SURMA: Exactly.
So I dug through it.
I kind of get it now.
But I'm going to, for the sake
of this episode, I'm going to--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: I didn't
have time to read that.
SURMA: I'm going to
turn into pseudocode.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Oh.
Well, ho, ho, ho.
SURMA: That catches the spirit.
So when you send
call postMessage,
the parameter is the message
that you want to send.
The target is kind of implicit.
If it's worker to
postMessage, you're obviously
sending it to the worker.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: To
the worker, yes.
SURMA: In the worker itself dot
post message, which implicitly
means the main thread that
spawned you will receive
the message, what is happening
is the parameter, which I call
data, yeah, the message
you want to send,
gets serialized with a function
called structuredSerialize.
The function is not real,
at least not in the sense
it's exposed to JavaScript.
But it exists in the spec.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So
I guess we should
say that your to
JSON function that we
used before was returning
an object, not a string.
SURMA: Not a string.
No, an object.
It could also be a string,
like, structuredSerialize
doesn't care.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: But it wasn't
doing its own serialization.
SURMA: No.
Not really.
So let's just turn it into a--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Adjacent
compatible object.
Right.
I see.
SURMA: So the structure
of this will turn this
into a serialized format.
That serialized
format is not specced.
It's JavaScript engine internal.
But it basically just means
it is some form of binary
representation that is not
a [INAUDIBLE] object in this
current state but encapsulates
all the keys and values and all
the things--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right.
SURMA: --that it
needs to contain.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Excellent.
SURMA: The next step is queue
a task in the targetRealm.
Now, the targetRealm
is basically the thread
that will receive the message.
And we are now putting something
into the Task queue that
will run some code once
that task gets [? scaled, ?]
which we don't necessarily
know when that's going to be.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
And that's how it's
going to schedule--
because currently, you're
in the HTML document, but
it needs to be doing stuff
on the worker thread.
And this is how it
gets onto that thread.
SURMA: Exactly.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right.
SURMA: Now, the
first step of that
task is to turn that
serialized data back
into a new instance of data.
So this is effectively a deep
copy of our original message
object.
And this is kind of important
because in JavaScript, you
can't share objects.
Like one of the basic
assumptions of JavaScript is
everything is single threaded.
So there is no synchronized
or parallel access
of the same data object or
same memory with JavaScript.
So we can't just send
the same object over.
It has to be a copy.
And these two steps is
how that is achieved.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Got you.
And this is different
to JSON serialization.
Because it supports
more formats.
SURMA: It handled stuff
like cyclic data structures.
It can do--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Blobs.
SURMA: --blobs, maps,
sets, array buffers,
all these things
that JSON cannot do.
And then the last
step here is basically
dispatching the actual event.
So at that point, your message
event handler will get called,
and it have the data object
on the event object, which
you can just access.
And now you own it.
And it's in your realm.
And all is good.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Cool.
Brilliant.
Yes.
SURMA: So this is how
postMessage works.
Now the interesting
bit, of course,
is structuredSerialize
and structuredDeserialize,
which are the functions that are
most likely the expensive ones.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes.
Of course.
SURMA: But even more
importantly, and something
I didn't realize before
I wrote my article,
is that structuredSerialize
is a function that
will block the sending realm,
while structuredDeserialize
will block the receiving realm.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: And I guess--
OK, so for the serialized,
that makes sense.
Because it doesn't
want to be doing that
work while you're
editing the object?
SURMA: Right.
Well, even with
deserialize, it makes sense,
because it is using the objects
of your realm [INAUDIBLE]
like the arrays and whatnot.
So it can't really
run those necessarily
while your code
is still running.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Right.
So if you change,
like, I don't know,
the prototype or
something halfway through,
you wouldn't expect that to
be reflected in [INAUDIBLE]
SURMA: Exactly.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: But this won't
be calling stuff on the global,
like the new array stuff.
SURMA: No, not sure.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: I feel
like that could be--
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
SURMA: I think I've heard they
have considered doing that.
But as now at least,
it is not currently.
It will block the
receiving realm.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Gotcha.
SURMA: So that's
actually interesting,
because it means so far
I've always been measuring--
or I keep measuring that moment
from when I start sending
an object to when I receive it.
But the number I get out
is actually two parts.
It's one part is the serializing
and one part is deserializing,
which are happening
in different realms.
And so I would like to
measure them separately,
but I haven't found a
good way to do that.
So I'm still measuring
that in my benchmark
that we're going to talk about.
But just something to keep
in mind that the numbers
that we are going to
talk about while I
do the dreaded microbenchmark.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Oh, no.
OK.
SURMA: And these
numbers will represent
the sum of serialization
and deserialization.
So the actual cost
on each thread
will be something
lower than that number.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So how you are
measuring that is basically
you make a marker just before
you call a postMessage.
And it's at the other end--
SURMA: More or less.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: --when you,
OK, you've got the message.
SURMA: Pretty much,
that's what I'm measuring.
I decided to do that because
I found a couple of ways
how to maybe measure just
deserialize in isolation.
I found no way to just measure
serialize in isolation.
But I could only
figure out these ways,
use these ways in
Chrome and Safari.
So I wouldn't have been
able to do Firefox.
And so I thought the end-to-end
test gives me an upper bound.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Wouldn't
either side of postMessage
give you the serialized time?
SURMA: Not sure.
Maybe.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Maybe.
It might add other
stuff as well.
SURMA: So I'd rather
do end-to-end, so
like this is the upper bound.
Like, it will definitely be
less expensive than this.
So it gives you a worst case to
reason about, which I think--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Makes sense.
SURMA: --is probably better if
we're talking about resilience
and similar issues.
The first thing that
I wanted to find out
is not necessarily
get hard numbers,
but just figure out
what shape of a message
will make postMessage slow.
Is it just really complex
objects with lots of notes?
Or can it also be a very simple
object with very big strings
as values?
And so what I did is basically
I wrote a function that
generates very different
objects with sometimes very
small with long, long keys
between like 2 to 4 kilobytes,
and sometimes very
complex graphs of objects
with just very short keys
and short values, something
along those lines.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: It
feels like [INAUDIBLE]
would be more
effort because it's
going to spin around [? the ?]
serialized function more.
SURMA: Because when
you think about it,
both functions will
have to somehow traverse
the entire object.
So my hunch was as well that
simple object with longer
values would be faster to
copy than complex objects
with simpler [INAUDIBLE].
Turns out, it's actually fairly
linear with this serialized--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Oh, hang on.
SURMA: --payload side.
So if you have an object--
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
Like a kind of wave.
What's going on?
SURMA: All right.
I'm about to explain that.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Explain it now.
SURMA: So if you basically
JSON stringify your payload
and look at the length
of that string as a size,
that's a very, very
strong indicator
for how long it's going to--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Really?
So even just like if
it's a thing which just
one massive string?
SURMA: Yes.
Even long strings take a
long time to copy, it seems.
Or the other way around,
it's just as fast
to copy a complex object and
a simple object if same size.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Oh, hang
on, what're we talking--
Go ahead.
SURMA: So keep in
mind, both scales
are logarithmic
because otherwise--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Of
course, they are.
SURMA: And so this correlation
kind of holds mathematically
but only really for
objects above 10 kilobytes.
Because if you look at it, you
can see it's curving inwards.
There's a couple of outliers.
And that's for a
couple of reasons.
One is that we still have
reduced precision timers
due to spectral meltdown.
We also even add some
jitter to the timing
to make it less useful
for these high precision
timing attacks
that were involved.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Of course.
SURMA: But also,
at the lower end,
just some weird fluctuations
and static overhead
just skews the numbers more.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Gotcha.
SURMA: So this was
run on my MacBook
Pro, where it
ended up with about
5 microseconds per kilobytes.
This number is
not really useful.
It will be different
on any other device.
It's not something
that's worth measuring.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Because you're
targeting a low end phone,
and you're--
SURMA: Right.
So I definitely don't
measure these numbers
and make decisions off it.
I just found it interesting
to see which kind scale we
are talking.
So that's why I do what I did.
So now that I knew,
basically, it doesn't matter.
Just the stringified
size is a good indicator
of how long it works.
I just want to use that
across a couple of devices
and see at what point do we
run into trouble in terms
of [? rail ?] budgets.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: OK.
So we're talking when it starts
getting over 16 milliseconds.
SURMA: For example.
So yeah.
That's basically what I did.
I started on my
MacBook in Chrome,
did 1,000 runs for each
constellation year,
and basically wanted
to see at what
point do we run into
[? rail ?] budget problems.
So basically what
we're looking for
is numbers around or bigger
than 16 milliseconds.
So if we look at this over
here, the green area, which
means anything
between 100 kilobytes
and 1 megabyte of
payload size, that's
where on a MacBook Pro in
Chrome we are in trouble zone.
Everything lower than that,
we're absolutely fine.
We won't risk--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So when you say
payload, what's the units here?
It's not just like free
objects [INAUDIBLE] right?
SURMA: Actually it's like
every node, on breadth,
every node has three values
or four values or five values.
And the depth is
how deep do we go.
So how complex is the tree
that I'm building here?
I have more examples
on my blog post.
But basically what
we're just looking
at is, because we know
now that object size is
a good indicator, we just
look at the colors really.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So hang on.
So 6, 6, are we talking 36?
What's the--
SURMA: 6 to the sixth.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: 6 to the sixth.
Of course.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
JAKE ARCHIBALD: --big object.
SURMA: Yeah.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
SURMA: That's why we end
up with like 10 megabytes.
And I think each leaf key
is a 2 kilobyte string.
So it adds up to a lot of data.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Got you.
Right.
OK.
I'm following.
SURMA: And we can see for
[INAUDIBLE] megabytes,
we're blocking for 74
milliseconds, which
is quite a lot.
And if we have animations
running, that will be too much.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: 47?
SURMA: 47 milliseconds.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
You said 74, mate.
SURMA: German.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Is that how
numbers work in Germany?
SURMA: Yes.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Amazing.
I did not know.
SURMA: So 32 in German
is [SPEAKING GERMAN]
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Oh, right.
I thought you were just joking.
SURMA: No.
It's legit.
I still, like after four years
here, it still screws me up.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah,
three and 20, isn't it?
SURMA: I don't know why.
Like, everything else in
German is logical, mostly.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: So it's take
seven and 40 milliseconds.
SURMA: Yes.
Exactly 47.
But anything below
hard kilobytes,
we will be absolutely fine.
We won't block the
main thread too long
to make our animations jank.
However, and this is
the most important bit,
this is on a MacBook Pro.
Like, this is not representative
of the average device,
especially--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Oh, so this
is going to [INAUDIBLE] when
you're on a phone, because
our danger zone is much--
SURMA: I ran it on a Nokia 2.
So it's actually
pretty representative
of the 50th percentile
device across the world.
So it's pretty
much in the middle,
despite the hardware being
stuck in 2014, roughly speaking.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Whoa-ho
SURMA: [INAUDIBLE]
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Look at that.
Those circles got bigger.
SURMA: Yeah.
So if we now look for numbers
around the 16 millisecond mark,
we can now see
that to be safe, we
can't go much bigger
than 10 kilobytes.
This here, we have a 12 up
here, which might [INAUDIBLE]
JAKE ARCHIBALD: OK, 12 is--
SURMA: But if we look at
the transition between blue
and turquoise,
that's between here.
So we can't go much
bigger than 10 kilobytes
without risking our
[? rail ?] budget.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: But
the real boundary
hasn't shifted that
much, it feels like.
SURMA: Not that much.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Like, this
number has got bigger.
SURMA: Right.
But if you send 10
megabytes, you're bonkers.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes.
It's going to take a long time.
It's going to take
over half a second.
But generally, it's OK.
SURMA: And that, actually
would make me really happy.
Because I feel like if you
have animations running,
you're limited to 10 kilobytes.
Actually 10 kilobytes
is quite a lot.
You can put a lot of
stuff into 10 kilobytes.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
If you're just shifting around
Booleans and numbers, which--
SURMA: That being said,
do you remember this game
that we built?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Oh, my word.
It's "PROXX."
SURMA: Yeah.
So because this is the
maximum possible field--
[INAUDIBLE] actually
fit on the screen.
It's 40 by 40.
That's the biggest field
we currently allow.
So it's 1,600 cells.
And each of these cells has
a couple of flags to store.
And [INAUDIBLE] these
that we have in the code.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes, of course.
SURMA: And that is
basically our game state.
Like, we have this 40 by
40 two-dimensional array.
And each cell has this
data stored in it.
So we know what the
game field looks like.
Now, it turns out that that JSON
stringified actually adds up
to about 130 kilobytes of JSON.
So we are way too big to
send the entire state over.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yes, it is.
And I would say that
we're being somewhat--
like we're not lazy, but like--
SURMA: We could just
have one array per cell,
for example, or something.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
It could be an array buffer.
Because yeah, what
about like 32--
well, how many bits of
information do we need here?
I mean, maybe 32 would be fine.
I mean, because like
the touching mines,
touching flags only
goes up to eight.
SURMA: Yeah, essentially 3 bits.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Is 3 bits.
And then you've got--
SURMA: 9 bits.
We need 9 bits.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: 9 bits, right.
OK.
So this could just
be an array buffer.
It doesn't need to be--
SURMA: Or one number.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
--two-dimensional,
because we as long as
we know the width--
SURMA: That being said, we
ended up noticing that we take--
at the start, we
would just send--
whenever somebody
tapped something,
we have to send the updated
state to the main thread
so we can re-render.
Turns out that took too
long on the low end fonts.
Like, we couldn't do
it and we knew it.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
Yeah, that's true.
SURMA: So on the Performance
panel in DevTools,
that was too long.
And now, what we did
is something else.
Now, this is,
again, a game field.
But we said that
we would, instead
of sending the entire
state, we are sending
only the fields that changed.
So we basically did a diff.
And that's kind of
cool, because that
means the amount
that we have to send
is not proportionate to
the game state anymore,
but only to the
amount of changes
that we do to the game state.
Now even that, in
some situations,
especially on the first click,
could add up to a lot of data.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Because
you end up with a big
reveal at the start.
SURMA: So that could
add up to, in theory,
something about 70
kilobytes, if we
assume that like
80% of a field gets
revealed, which is unlikely.
But assume the worst case here.
So we did another thing.
And that's actually the
thing I want to talk about
because I find it really smart.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: We've
gotten to the thing
you want to talk about.
Mate, we have been
recording for quite a while.
[LAUGHTER]
And now, we get to the
meat of the episode, right.
SURMA: So when
somebody taps a fields,
our game logic
basically traverses
through the game
field and figures
out which fields need
to change the state.
And we record these
changes because we
want to send over the changes.
But whenever we have
found 10 changes or more--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Which we
just like, 10, why not?
SURMA: Pretty much.
That's the number we
pulled out of thin air.
We send those 10 changes
immediately so the main thread
and can start rendering
and doing stuff
while the worker keeps
going and keeps traversing.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
Because it's not just
the serialize and
deserialize cost.
It's the cost of just
scrolling the grid as well.
SURMA: Exactly.
And then we realized
that the way
we wrote that algorithm to
traverse the fields actually
looks really nice.
So on slow phones, which
I have a recording here,
it looks like a really
nice reveal animation,
even though on bigger
device this will be instant.
Like, this is animation,
so it's able--
so it will just be
[POP NOISE] there immediately.
But on slower devices, you
will get a nice animation.
And this is how we made this
huge state object actually
work on the lowest
of low end devices.
I was very proud of
us for doing that.
JAKE ARCHIBALD:
To the point where
when we found this, when
we saw this happening,
we made it happen on desktop
as well, just artificially
with our animation delays.
SURMA: Yeah, [INAUDIBLE]
desktop to get this animation.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Because
it was the second pass
of this algorithm.
Because the first time
we were doing depth first
and we ran into stack problems.
And then so we switched
to be queue based.
And that's when we ended
up with [INAUDIBLE]
SURMA: The point is
that imagine you're
[INAUDIBLE] the worker, there's
so many little tricks you can
do without bending over
backwards that I think
there is no good excuse to not
put your [INAUDIBLE] worker.
It helps you so much on
these slower devices.
We have done a test where we
ran "PROXX" all on main thread.
And it performed horribly.
So we actually are really
glad we chose to use a worker
right from the start.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah, especially
because we have animation
happening all the time.
It's difficult to see,
probably, from this angle.
But there's a-- because this is
the no-animated view as well.
But usually, these
little squares
have got inner animations.
SURMA: The rotate.
Like, we actually
have WebGL running.
We need all the budget
in the main thread
we can get to WebGL.
So everything else,
as much as we can,
we moved it somewhere else.
And we're quite
happy we did that.
So I think postMessage
has a cost,
but not to the point where
it makes off main thread
like completely unviable.
So I'm hoping that
with this, people
will be kind of inspired
to try it out and give off
main thread a shot for
managing the state.
We have some jitter
this is [BLEEP] added.
And of course, we have--
JAKE ARCHIBALD: [BLEEP] added.
SURMA: Artificially
added jitter.
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Sorry.
Say it's artificially
added again.
Because I interrupted.
And also, you said
[BLEEP] added.
SURMA: Did I?
JAKE ARCHIBALD: Yeah.
Pretty sure you did.
SURMA: I didn't even notice.